[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Namaste.
Welcome to Thrive
Self-healing with Ayurveda.
My name is Justine Lemos, and
I am an Ayurvedic practitioner.
Ayurveda is the science of life.
It's a holistic form
of wellness that has
its origins in ancient India.
In this video, I'm
going to share with you
Ayurvedic rituals
for blissful sleep.
Most people agree that sleep is
a key to good health and health
maintenance.
And in Ayurveda we
have an understanding
of the cycles of the day
that allows us to attune
our natural bio rhythms.
Sleep is foundational
to good health.
It's one of the
pillars of good health.
And yet so many people are
afflicted with poor sleep.
Now, in Ayurveda we
understand the cycle
of the day in terms
of the three doshas.
These doshas are intelligences.
They are vata, which
is cold, dry, and fast.
Pitta, which is like
fire, is intense.
It's that which promotes
digestion in the body.
And kapha is like
earth and water.
It's heavy.
It's stable.
It's grounded.
Each segment of
the day or night is
ruled by one of these doshas.
And that gives each segment of
the day a particular energy.
So times of day that are ruled
by what we call vata dosha,
which is like air
and ether, are times
of the day that are
very light and restless.
These are the times of the
day when the nervous system is
naturally stimulated.
Vata rules the
early morning hours
between 2:00 AM and 6:00 AM,
when sleep is naturally light.
It also rules in the daytime
from 2:00 PM to 6:00 PM.
If you've ever
worked in an office,
you may notice that
the hours of 2:00
PM to when people go home
is a time when people
tend to chat or wander around.
Less work gets done often
than in the morning.
And the energy is different
than in the morning,
which is ruled by pitta
dosha, which is like fire.
Times of the day that
are ruled by pitta dosha
are when digestion
is at its highest.
In the daytime, this is when
our digestive fire is stronger.
So from 10:00 AM to 2:00 PM.
And then from 10:00 PM
to 2:00 AM in the night.
Now, you might notice that if
you stay up past around 11:00
PM you get a second wind.
You might want a midnight snack.
You'll notice that your
body might start to rev up.
And this is actually working
against our natural biorhythms.
Because this is the time
when we should be digesting
the experience of the day.
So kapha dosha, which is
heavy, like water and mud.
It's cold and wet.
And the times of the day
that are ruled by kapha dosha
are slower moving.
Kapha dosha periods are
between 6:00 PM and 10:00 PM,
and 6:00 AM and 10:00 AM.
Notice how the morning hours
are often cold and dewy.
We often feel slow
in the morning.
This is because of the
energy of kapha dosha.
Now, healthy sleep
depends upon us
working with our body's natural
rhythms throughout the day.
Insomnia is generally caused
by increased vata dosha,
or pressure in the
nervous system.
And when vata dosha
is out of balance,
this can create
difficulty falling asleep.
One key is to make sure that
the evening hours between 6:00
PM and 10:00 PM, when kapha
dosha is ruling those hours
should be settled and rounded.
Insomnia is also associated
with pitta imbalance,
or what becomes the energy of
the liver becoming too heated.
This aggravated vata and
pitta can vitiate kapha,
resulting in sleep disturbance.
Now, the most common
sleep disturbance
associated with the
energy of the liver
is in an early morning waking
between 2:00 AM and 4:00 AM.
And all of these factors
can be causative in sleep
disturbances.
Irregular routine,
mental, emotional stress,
excessive mental or
physical activities,
especially in the evening.
Pain in the body can
result in poor sleep.
Poor digestion.
Even excessive talking or
singing just before bed.
A foundational practice for
rectifying sleep disturbances
is the creation of a
soothing evening ritual.
This sets ourselves up for
a night of blissful sleep.
I like to start my evening
ritual by doing a soothing
practice of oil massage.
You can see my how to video on
Abhyanga, or daily oil massage,
to get more information
on this soothing ritual.
If I don't have time to
massage my entire body,
I might just do my feet.
And what's important is
that the oil is warm,
and that you follow the oil
massage with a warm shower.
Next I like to take about
3/4 of a cup of warm milk.
And in Ayurveda we
like to boil milk,
because it changes its proteins.
And we add some spices to
make it more digestible.
Two pinches of nutmeg
and a pinch of cardamom
powder while we boil the milk.
This makes the boiled
milk more digestible.
The cardamom helps
with digestion.
And the nutmeg is
a sleep inducer.
We can also use a
dairy free milk.
But the milk provides a lot
of vitality to the body,
and can help put us to sleep.
And even if you think that you
can't take milk, cow's milk,
goat milk, dairy, boiling the
milk and adding the spices
makes it so much more digestible
that often people even who
think they have a dairy
intolerance or lactose
intolerance can
actually take some milk.
By this time in
the evening, I like
to make sure that all
my screens are off
and that the lights
are set to low,
or I'm just enjoying
candlelight.
It's also very important
that we reserve our beds just
for sleep and for
lovemaking, because we're
setting up our consciousness.
We're setting up our mind.
We're telling our minds
that our bed is for sleep.
Our bed isn't for scrolling
through screens or watching TV.
We want to associate our
beds with blissful sleep.
And activities like reading
and watching TV in bed
can disturb our
biorhythms, and make
it difficult to fall asleep,
and then to stay asleep.
While sipping on milk, it's
nice to listen to some very
relaxing and peaceful music.
I also like to place some drops
of essential oils in water.
And I place them by the bedside.
If you have pets, be
careful that the pets
can't drink the water.
If you have difficulty
falling asleep,
you could try essential oil
of sweet orange, or bergamot,
or lavender essential oil.
If you have early morning
wakings, you could try rose,
or Lang Lang, or
sandalwood essential oil.
There are some
great formulas that
can be very useful in
calming the nervous system,
and helping with
difficulty falling asleep,
and helping with difficulty
in staying asleep.
So you can talk to an
Ayurvedic practitioner
about these herbal remedies.
But I also recommend that
you talk to your health care
provider prior to starting
any other herbal formulas.
Now, you can repeat this
video to be reminded
about the cycles of the day,
about how to rectify difficulty
falling asleep and
early morning wakings.
You can explore the
rest of this series
to learn more about
unique self-care tips
and rituals for vital health.
Empower yourself
with the knowledge
to harmonize your
health and your life.
Enjoy your rest.
Namaste.
[HUMMING]
Don't forget to explore
the rest of this series
by watching our docu series,
yoga practices, meditations,
and self-care videos.
[MUSIC PLAYING]